IBX-9387: Collaborative editing described in User Documentation - v5.0 (#328)
ezsystems/user-documentation: docs/content_management/collaborative_editing.md

---
description: Learn about Collaborative editing feature and its capabilities.
---

# Collaborative editing

Collaborative editing is a feature that allows multiple users to work on the same content item at the same time.
The system automatically tracks changes and allows users to collaborate within a single application, without the need for third-party tools.

> Users can work together and use a real-time editor to create and review content live.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can work together, create and review content in real time.
```
I'm not sure about "create and review content live."

This makes teamwork faster, more efficient, and simplifies content review process.
It allows to work directly with members of other teams, such as subject matter experts, compliance professionals, and sales representatives, to increase content quality.

## Collaboration session

> When you create a new draft of content item you can invite other users to join a collaboration session, thanks to [CKEditor collaboration features](https://ckeditor.com/ckeditor-5/capabilities/collaboration-features/).

Reviewer: I wonder if the end-users (editors) need to know that we rely on CKeditor.

IMHO - not needed implementation detail.

```suggestion
When you create a new draft of content item you can invite other users to join a collaboration session.
```

To invite collaborators, click the **Share** button, which creates a new collaboration session.

![Share button](img/share_button.png)

Then, in a pop-up window, you can invite users to newly created session.

!!! note

    Only the Owner can invite other users and initiate collaboration session.

>     You can only invite users with permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can only invite users with permissions to access the shared content.
```
"with permissions" is not specific enough, imho

Author: Link to dev-doc will be added when ready.

    Users without permissions are grayed out and you can't select them and invite them to the session.

You can invite two types of users:

- **Internal** - by searching their name or email address. These users can either edit the content item or preview it, depending on your choice.

![Internal users - invitation](img/invite_internal_user.png)

> - **External** - by providing their email address in the field. They can only preview the content item (editing option isn't available, it's greyed out).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **External** - by providing their email address in the field. They can only preview the content item (editing option isn't available, it's grayed out).
```
To keep it consistent (gray is american spelling 👍 )

Additionally, you can share a direct link to the collaborative session.
To do it, click the **Copy link** button.
Link is copied to the clipboard and you can share it with the users through communication channels.

After inviting users to a collaboration session, they receive a notification:

- visible when clicking the **Notification** icon on the main dashboard (internal users)
- by email (external users)

![Notification - internal user](img/internal_notification.png)

Collaboration session begins when first invited user accepts the invitation and joins the session, and ends when the Owner performs one of the action:

- save and close
- publish the content (including "Publish later" option)
- delete content draft
- discard
- move the draft in the workflow
- end collaboration session

Each user can leave collaboration session anytime or rejoin it.

## Editing content item

Collaborative editing is enabled in Rich Text fields.
Other fields are disabled and can be only edited by the Owner of the content item.

Collaboration is available for the following content types containing Rich Text fields:

- Article
- Folder
- Form
- Product category
- Custom content types

> - Product (without variants)

Reviewer: Same comments as for product guide (we should mention products here).

There are two modes of the collaboration:

- **Real-time (online)** - editing content at the same time with real-time tracking of the presence and changes of other users

> - **Asynchronous** - ediitng content in different time, saving changes as new version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Asynchronous** - ediitng content independently and saving changes as new version
```
" in different time" sounds incorrect to me

I don't think you can save as a new version when editing a draft? Not sure how that works (I might be wrong)

Also, if non-Owners cannot save the draft then working asynchronously doesn't really seem possible? They cannot save the draft when the owner is not there.

Only the Owner can publish content, save it, delete the draft, or publish it.
Changes are automatically saved when the Owner saves or publishes the content.

> Users can continue collaboration without the Owner presence, but they cannot save, or publish changes.

Reviewer: Is there anything they can do? If not I'd make it a warning.

### Real-time collaboration

> Real-time collaboration is a premium feature thtat works by syncing changes in real time, so everyone can see updates instantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Real-time collaboration is a premium feature that works by syncing changes in real time, so everyone can see updates instantly.
```

> Real-time collaboration is a premium feature thtat works by syncing changes in real time, so everyone can see updates instantly.

Reviewer: "premium feature" is not explained, it's not clear what that means in terms of availability.

Avatars of the users invited to collaboration session are visible at the top of the editing screen, also in distraction free mode.
While editing Rich Text fields, you can see colored tracking tags with user avatar thumbnails that indicate who is currently working on it.

![Collaboration - users tags](img/users_tags.png)

> Thanks to this, other users in the same session and editing the same piece of the content item at the same time, can see the actions and editing elements performed by a specific user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to this, other users in the same session and editing the same piece of the content item at the same time, can see the actions and editing elements performed by a specific user.
```
I'm not sure what "editing elements" are
In addition, it would be nice to simplify this sentence

You can see all users belonging to a given content item's collaboration session.
All users avatars are displayed:

- at the top of the content item editing window

> - in distraction free mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- also in distraction free mode
```
?
Or only in distraction free mode?

When you hover over the user avatar, the user’s first and last name is displayed.
If you want to see all participants list, click at the avatars group.

![Participants list](img/participants_list.png)

## Work with draft

You can access created draft in **Content** -> **Drafts**.
Here you can join your collaboration session, share with more users, edit given permissions, or delete the draft.

![Work with draft](img/work_with_draft.png)

> ## Dashboard blocks

Reviewer: Just to be sure, does this work with both dashboards? The one in Headless and the second one in Exp/Commerce?

Author: Yes, it works for all editions.

---
description: Learn about Collaborative editing feature and its capabilities.
---

# Collaborative editing

Collaborative editing is a feature that allows multiple users to work on the same content or product - whether to preview, review, or edit it.

> By giving users access to preview the content before it's published, review and collaboration becomes much easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By giving users access to preview the content before it's published, review and collaboration become much easier.
```

Users can edit the content or product only if an administrator gives them the necessary permissions.
These permissions must be set before the user is invited to the session, otherwise the **Edit** access option is unavailable (grayed out).

While editing Rich Text fields, you can see colored tracking tags with user avatar thumbnails that indicate who is currently working on it.

![Collaboration - users tags](img/users_tags.png)

This allows other users in the same session, who are working the same content, to see what each person is editing in real time.

You can see all users belonging to a given content item's collaboration session.
All users avatars are displayed at the top of the content item editing window, also in distraction free mode.

When you hover over the user avatar, the user’s first and last name is displayed.
If you want to see all participants list, click at the avatars group.

![Participants list](img/participants_list.png)

## Editing content item

Collaborative editing is enabled in Rich Text fields.
Other fields are disabled and can be only edited by the owner of the content item.

> Collaboration is available for the following content types containing Rich Text fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collaboration is available for the following content and product types containing Rich Text fields:
```

Each user can leave collaboration session anytime or rejoin it.

### Real-time collaboration

Real-time collaboration is an advanced option of the Collaborative editing feature.
It works by syncing changes in real time, so everyone can see updates instantly.

> Avatars of the users invited to collaboration session are visible at the top of the editing screen, also in distraction free mode.

Reviewer: Duplicated sentence (see line 88)

- Form
- Product category
- Custom content types
- Custom product types (without variants)

There are two modes of the collaboration:

- **Real-time (online)** - editing content at the same time with real-time tracking of the presence and changes of other users
- **Asynchronous** - editing content independently

!!! warning

    Only the owner can publish content, save it, delete the draft, or publish it.
    Changes are automatically saved when the owner saves or publishes the content.
    Users can continue collaboration without the owner presence, but they cannot save, or publish changes.

>     They can also leave collaboration session any time without losing data.

Reviewer: I think it's a bit confusing - the changes are saved only when the owner peforms an action, but people can leave any time  the session without losing their data?

In other words: non-owners cannot save their changes, but there's no way for them to lose the data?

What happens in a scenario like this:
- Owner leaves
- A collaborator enters a new sentence into the richtext field
- Collaborator leaves

Will the sentence be lost or will it be saved in the field?
